---
title: "One-dimensional moving window atomistic framework to model long-time shock wave propagation"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-11-01-1D-mwmd-cmame
excerpt: 'We develop a long-time moving window framework using Molecular Dynamics (MD) to model shock wave propagation through a one-dimensional chain of atoms.'
date: 2020-11-01
venue: 'Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2020.113290'
citation: 'Davis A. and Agrawal V., One-dimensional moving window atomistic framework to model long-time shock propagation, <i>Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering</i>, <b>371</b> (2020), 113290.'
---

We develop a long-time moving window framework using Molecular Dynamics (MD) to model shock wave propagation through a one-dimensional chain of atoms. The moving window formulation “follows” a propagating shock wave allowing us to model shock wave propagation much longer than conventional non-equilibrium MD (NEMD) simulations. This formulation also significantly decreases the required domain size and thus reduces the overall computational cost. The domain is divided into a purely atomistic “window” region containing the shock wave flanked by boundary or “continuum” regions on either end which incorporate continuum shock conditions. Spurious wave reflections are removed by employing a damping band method using the Langevin thermostat applied locally to the atoms in each continuum region. The moving window effect is achieved by adding/removing atoms to/from the window and boundary regions, and thus the shock wave front is focused at the center of the window region indefinitely. We simulate the shock through a one-dimensional chain of copper atoms using either the Lennard-Jones, modified Morse, or Embedded Atom Model (EAM) interatomic potential. We first perform verification studies to ensure proper implementation of the thermostat, potential functions, and damping band method, respectively. Next, we track the propagating shock and compare the actual shock velocity and average particle velocity to their corresponding analytical input values. From these comparisons, we optimize the linear shock Hugoniot relation for the given “lattice” orientation and compare these results to those in literature. When incorporated into the linear shock equation, these new Hugoniot parameters are shown to produce a stationary shock wave front. Finally, we perform one-dimensional moving window simulations of an unsteady, structured shock up to a few nanoseconds and characterize the increase in the shock front’s width.